title: Diary del Norte, part 1, days 0-5
date: 2023-11-15
description: Foxes, schizophrenics, cults, food, and gorgeous scenery. A day-by-day account of my experience hiking Spain's Camino del Norte. Transcribed from my diary. 
tags: travel

### Introduction
This is an account of my experience doing the Camino de Santiago (Way of St. James) in Spain. The Camino is a pilgrimage that is undertaken by hundreds of thousands of religious adherents, tourists and hiking enthusiasts each year. It's over 1000 years old. I probably heard of it when I was studying Spanish in Valencia. That was over 4 years ago. This year I knew I would have free time after submitting my PhD thesis, and so, after a few hours of research, I took the plunge and booked a flight to Bilbao in northern Spain, where my Camino would begin. My plan was to do the Camino del Norte (the Northern Way, a less-busy coastal route) over the course of about 30 days, starting on October 7th. I skipped a few stages by starting in Bilbao, because I didn't have time to do the whole thing, but I still had to walk over 500km to reach the end.

I kept a Spanish diary every day of the trip. To share the experience with others, I've decided to transcribe, translate and expand the diary. It will be spread over multiple blog posts, because I wrote A LOT.

First, though, here's the obligatory packing list. I had a relatively small backpack, with a capacity of 22L. It weighed 4-6kg, depending on whether my water bottle was full and whether I was carrying food. Many other pilgrims commented on how small and light my bag was. This was intentional - my research led me to believe that weight was the most important thing to optimise for.

* 22L backpack.
* 3 pairs of socks (merino wool, helps to avoid blisters).
* 3 pairs of underwear.
* 3 t-shirts (synthetic material, dries faster).
* 1 pair of shorts (hiking shorts, dry quickly).
* trail runners (breathable, good foot support, dry quickly when wet).
* rain poncho (keeps bag and upper body dry).
* light jumper.
* scarf.
* baseball cap.
* sunglasses.
* microfiber towel (dries fast).
* passport.
* water bottle.
* pharmacy stuff (in a plastic bag): suncream, paracetamol, antihistamines, insect spray, blister plasters / bandages, vaseline.
* toothbrush and toothpaste.
* a bar of soap (for washing self + clothes)
* phone/charger.
* converter for sockets.
* Kindle.
* journal + pen.
* 3 safety pins (for hanging wet clothes off the backpack when walking).

While there are some things I might change in retrospect, I feel that the packing was a success! Possible amendments:

* I probably should've brought another pair of shorts, because with only 1 pair I needed a private room in order to wash them, unless I wanted to show my bits to the world.
* The scarf came in useful on one or two particularly chilly mornings, but mostly felt like a waste of space.
* It would've been good to have a container for my soap because it made a mess when wet.
* The sunglasses weren't needed when I had a baseball cap; as it happens, though, I lost the baseball cap and the sunglasses got some use.
* The Kindle probably wasn't needed, given that I only read like 100 pages of my book during the whole trip, but I would be reluctant to give it up.
* Earphones would've been helpful on days when I was extremely bored, but I didn't bring them because "living in the moment" or something.
* Some pilgrims marvelled at my lack of a sleeping bag, and a few albergues didn't provide a blanket at night, but I managed to survive by draping my towel & jumper over myself. 

For the curious, my full planning document for the Camino can be found [here](/camino-plan.txt). Now, on to the diary!

### Day 0, Saturday, October 7th, Bilbao (0km)
Arrived in Bilbao. 30°C, roughly. Decided to stay the night, went to the Guggenheim museum and a vegan restaurant called Veggira, which was excellent. Patatas bravas, stuffed mushrooms, red wine and a brownie with ice-cream. My Spanish is rusty, but I managed to survive all my interactions today without anyone switching to English - woohoo! The bad news: all the reasonably-priced accommodation is booked out, so I've had to pay €130 for a private room in a hotel called BYPILLOW Irala. The room isn't even particularly nice. Should've booked in advance.

### Day 1, Sunday, October 8th, Bilbao to Portugalete (20.1km)
The first day of walking. I used the map in the Buen Camino app to find my way to the route, which was only 2 blocks away from my hotel. Saw my first blue and yellow camino marker! Instead of an arrow, there's a picture of a conch shell, but it's not clear which direction it's pointing. After making my way out of the city, I had to climb a tall hill. My glutes are sore now. Nice views of Bilbao though. At the top of the hill, there was a small hermitage whose name I can't remember. Two cats lived there, and today I also saw horses, sheep, donkeys, etc. I like seeing so many animals!

Arrived at my first albergue (hostel), met plenty of pilgrims but didn't talk to anyone at length. Washed my clothes in a sink using my bar of soap, then hung them up to dry. Went for food, had to cross a river in a "hanging bridge" / cable car thing. It was cool, but also I'm not sure why they didn't just build a regular bridge? Ate outside, observing the Spanish street scenes, and had 2 cañas (half pints) of Radler.

### Day 2, Monday, October 9th, Portugalete to Castro-Urdiales (35.1km, 55.2km total)
Didn't sleep well, there were sick people coughing and I was woken up twice by a mosquito buzzing in my ear. I also had to pee several times during the night thanks to those damn cañas. Then I woke up at 5am due to the noise of departing pilgrims. So I've been very tired today. My feelings vary between happiness and anxiety. I'm still adapting to the routine, and also worried that I might get stuck paying for an overpriced hotel again.

I left the albergue at 8am, accompanying two fellow pilgrims who invited me to join them. Before leaving, I also met Max, a rather unusual man. He asked me where I was from, so I returned the question. Little did I know, I was setting myself up to be bombarded with his sad life story for the whole day. He started by informing me that it was in fact a long story. His parents were British-American or something, but he grew up in various Eastern European countries. He somehow moved on to talking about the Orthodox church and how an Orthodox priest had hit him on the head once.

The two pilgrims I set out with: Mari, a business psychologist from Germany; and Iria (?), a Galician who works in Santiago! She said that 1000s of pilgrims arrive in Santiago every day. As we walked, several passing cyclists sent a "Buen Camino!" our way. We came across a colony of stray cats. They were being fed by an overly-protective woman who warned us not to go near them, even though all we were doing was quietly watching from a distance. Fuck you and your cats, lady! Shortly afterwards, Max came walking from the opposite direction. We informed him that he was walking the wrong way, so he turned around and joined us. I was the one who got stuck talking to him while we walked, since my companions did not engage. We arrived at a beach town where we bought supplies in a shop and rested for a bit, while Max went on ahead. Then I left my companions because, while I appreciated their company, I was planning to walk a lot that day, and I didn't want to hang around for too long.

There was a diversion because fallen rocks had blocked the cliffside path. When the paths rejoined, I ran into Max yet again and got stuck walking with him for another hour or two. He told me he was in a car crash at the age of 3. Both of his parents died in the crash, but Vladimir Putin managed to pull him from the wreck and administer a life-saving dose of morphine to him. He was even able to quote something that Putin said to another person at the scene. Then he got brought by helicopter to a Soviet military base, from where he ended up being adopted and living in various Soviet states, including Armenia and Georgia.

Max thinks the Georgian government is out to get him, and has had him poisoned several times. It started after he had been working for the Georgian police for 7 years, developing tracking software. One day, he refused his orders and got fired. Now Georgians are out to get him, sabotaging him by ripping tiny holes in his bag and wearing down the rubber on the sole of his shoe. Honestly, I feel sorry for him. He's probably schizophrenic. He has shitty shoes and blisters. He's carrying two big backpacks, which may or may not contain all of his worldly possessions. He said that he survives on the generosity of strangers, so perhaps the whole story was intended to elicit my sympathy and financial support. I didn't feel entirely comfortable in his presence, though, so I was relieved when it turned out that our destinations were different and we parted ways.

I eventually arrived at my hotel (1 star and cheap) in Castro-Urdiales after 8 hours of walking. Hoping to catch up on my sleep. Feet are sore, hopefully I don't get blisters.

### Day 3, Tuesday, October 10th, Castro-Urdiales to Laredo (25.7km, 80.9km total)
A day of steep slopes, sore feet, and conversations. I started at 7:30am. The scenery was beautiful, but the route involved a lot of walking on concrete, which I really felt in my feet and legs.

I was walking past someone's yard when I heard the frantic clucking of chickens. They - a mass of feathers and flapping wings - came running towards me. I thought I was about to be attacked by some unusually violent hens, but then I caught a glimpse of a canine creature and realised that something - a dog, a wolf - was chasing them. I dodged out of the way and hid behind the adjacent house, not wanting to go toe-to-toe with an aggressive dog or whatever it was, and not wanting to witness any chickens getting murdered.

The clucking died down a few seconds later and I stepped out to see what was going on, only to see the culprit, a fox, trotting back into the yard. It spotted me and we made eye contact. I clapped my hands and it ran away. I took a brief look around to make sure there were no mortally wounded chickens lying about, then decided it would be a good idea to inform the owner in case the fox came back for Round 2. I tried knocking on several doors in the area and, for some reason, stood up on a wall like a crazy person. At that point, I looked around and saw that a man was jog-walking towards me with 4-5 dogs. I tried to explain what had happened. He probably thought I was a lunatic and seemed more interested in getting back to his house to make sure I hadn't messed with anything. He eventually heard me out, but seemed to think the culprit was a neighbourhood cat. I was 99% certain it was a fox, though. I didn't know the Spanish for "clapped my hands" (*dar una palmada*), so I had to mime that part of the story. Yay for new vocabulary!

After leaving the scene (without any thanks for saving the chickens), I had to climb another hill, which I felt in my continuously-sore glutes. At the top, I met a man from Barcelona who was having a rest. We chatted about our respective countries, about other people we'd met so far, etc. I got some Catalan movie recommendations from him. He spoke Spanish slowly enough that I could understand him, which was nice. Later, I met an Italian woman and her mother who were doing the Camino together. The mother seemed to be suffering from all the walking. The daughter had done the Camino several times before. She gave me a plastic yellow arrow to tie onto my bag. I didn't want to take it, but it would've felt rude to say no, so now I have this plastic junk tied to my backpack, like a good pilgrim.

Now I'm in Laredo, being hosted at an old convent by an order of nuns. It only costs €10 to stay here, and it comes with breakfast. The nuns doing the check-in had an air of kindness about them, one from South America in particular. I wish I could talk to them more. I'm sharing a room with a nice old American man called Marty (it would be nice if there were an English equivalent of *estadounidense*, which can be used specifically to refer to someone from the USA). Luxurious compared to the last albergue. Wandered the town searching for a place with veggie food, the only thing I could find was a vegetarian burger. Tomorrow we leave Laredo by boat.

### Day 4, Wednesday, October 11th, Laredo to Güemes (28.7km, 109.6km total)
All the pilgrims gathered for breakfast. We were given sponge cake and tea/coffee. My first communal meal of the Camino! Everyone filtered out of the convent and started walking towards the boat departure point, hoping to make it in time for the first crossing of the day. The walk took about 1 hour.

Along the way, I introduced myself to Wesley and Aurora, a couple I recognised from the albergue in Portugalete. Wesley had actually been sleeping above me in the bunk bed, and my irritable self had sent mental daggers his way for the probably reasonable amount of noise he had made. Neither of them speaks English very well, and Aurora doesn't speak Spanish. Wesley speaks Portuguese, Italian and French fluently; he makes heavy use of vocabulary from these languages when speaking Spanish, but somehow we were able to understand each other and got along well. I learned that Wesley is Brazilian, living in Switzerland. Aurora is French, living in Brittany. They got together while doing the Camino Francés last year.

We arrived at the beach where the boat was supposed to pick us up. Other pilgrims joined us while we waited, including Felipe, a 70-something year-old Spanish man from Sevilla who had also stayed at the albergue in Portugalete. Also reappearing from Portugalete was Niko, a giant, grey-bearded, monolingual French man who had the habit of speaking and laughing to himself. There were 2 young Ukrainian women from the convent - I was curious about their life situation but wasn't sure if it would be appropriate to ask them anything.

The boat came and brought us the short distance to Santoña. During the crossing, I once again felt the communal buzz: music playing from a radio, people bantering, and the anticipation of setting out on the day's adventure. When the boat landed, however, I started to feel minor social anxiety due to the uncertainty of whether people expected to walk together or not. So I slipped away and walked ahead while the other pilgrims wandered around the landing point. Not proud to be socially awkward like that.

I followed the route along a road until I had to leave it and climb up onto some cliffs. There were beautiful views from the top, beaches on either side. I sat down on a rock to rest, as my feet were pretty sore. At this point I'd started following the advice that my mother had relayed to me: take a break every hour or two and air out your feet. This is supposed to help with blister prevention.

An Argentinian guy from the boat, Matias, caught up with me. I joined him for the next part of the trek, walking barefoot along a long beach. Matias came north to do the Camino after wrapping up a seasonal job as a waiter in Andalucia. Naturally, he knew about the Argentinian director Damián Szifron, although neither of us could remember his name and referred to him as the creator of *Hermanos y detectives* and *Los simuladores*. Matias normally earns a living by doing 3D modelling, along with odd jobs like food delivery, but he is re-evaluating his career and wants to do something involving the outdoors or interacting with people. We left each other at the end of the beach and I continued walking.

At some point I ran into Aurora and Wesley again. I discovered that Aurora is a farm manager. Wesley lives in cycles where he works for 6 months, then travels for 6 months. I think he mostly works as a chef? He left his home in Brazil at a relatively young age. His travels brought him to the US, where he spent 2 months in a prison for illegal immigration. Eventually, he traveled to Italy, where I think his mother and siblings had relocated, and he was able to get citizenship due to an Italian connection in the family. These days he lives in a houseshare in Switzerland, where he has outdoorsy hobbies like paragliding. For this trip, he drove to France on his motorbike, which he deposited at Aurora's house before setting off for Spain.

Finally, after several hours of walking in the heat on hard asphalt roads, we arrived at Albergue del Padre Peuto, a "donativo" albergue founded by a priest called Padre Ernesto. At a donativo albergue, you pay whatever you want. Ernesto set it up on the site of his old family home. There, with the help of volunteers, he shares his life philosophy with passing pilgrims, which can be summarised as "life is the real Camino". The whole place has the vibe of a hippy forest retreat. I was registered by a friendly Mexican volunteer called Antonio, made my bed (using disposable pillow covers & sheets, as usual), washed my clothes, and explored the property.

Before dinner, we were gathered into a circular hut with wall paintings. Here, we received a 30-minute lecture on the philosophy of the albergue. Life is a Camino, there's a start and an end and challenges along the way. You shouldn't be focused on getting to the next town when there's someone at your side who needs help, yada yada. I think it's a good message, just a bit sanctimonious and cultish. A cynical thought came to mind: "every trip to the shop is a Camino, there's a start and an end and challenges along the way". I noticed some hungry people checking the time. The speaker was entertaining, at least, and it was impressive that the volunteer translator was able to retain so much of what he was saying. Usually, Padre Ernesto is the one who gives the talk, but he's now well over 80 years old and was tired from an interview he had done earlier in the day. Much emphasis was placed on how it was our "responsibility" to pay a fair amount for the services that were provided for us at the albergue.

After the talk, it was time for dinner, which turned out to be really good. Generous helpings of vegetable soup and pasta. Padre Ernesto even came to give us a short speech. He told us his life story: when he was a young priest, he'd spent time working in an isolated mountainside parish. He found the way of life there inspiring, particularly how the people relied on and helped each other. This greatly influenced his life philosophy. He traveled around the world in a jeep, visiting many different countries and impoverished peoples. The dining room was basically a museum of his travels and experiences, with many souvenirs and photographs. Despite my cynicism, tears came to my eyes as I thought about how Ernesto was continuing to spread his message, even as he approached the end of his life.

But yeah, the dinner was great! I loved the feeling of community. I got to meet some cool new people. Teresa, a German woman with a shaved head who walked for 6 months to get here from from Germany. Three older Argentinian women that Iria and other pilgrims had told me about. I said they were Camino celebrities, which gave them a laugh. One of them, Bianca, is an artist and will be doing a residency while she's in Spain. André, a hippy-looking Dominican guy whom I had seen meditating on the grass earlier. Also at the dinner were many old faces: Marty, Wesley, Aurora, Johann and Joepke (a Dutch couple from the convent), Sonia and Mira (the Ukrainians), and Felipe.

I feel like I'm becoming more confident in myself over here. I've initiated conversations with several people, which I felt uncomfortable doing at the beginning. Also getting to practice my Spanish quite a bit.

### Day 5, Thursday, October 12th, Güemes to Santander (10.5km, 120.1km total)
We departed early after a short breakfast. I didn't sleep well due to the heat in the dorm. Aurora and Wesley left before me, but I caught up with them after a while. I passed out 3 Spanish men on the way, more old faces from the first albergue. When they found out I was Irish, they mentioned James Joyce. I asked who's the Spanish language equivalent of James Joyce, one of them said Miguel Cervantes. I thought he would be more the equivalent of Shakespeare? Haven't read Don Quijote, though, so I don't know.

Anyway. More walking along the coast, surrounded by fields of animals. Aurora and Wesley like to imitate animal noises, never fails to make me laugh. Wesley took an alternative route at some point, I think he wanted to have some time to himself. In his place, we were accompanied by a Chinese guy called Wei Tee (or something like that) who works in Barcelona. After traversing more cliffs, we came to another beach. This one was extremely long. We followed it all the way to the end, until we arrived at a town where we could get the boat to Santander.

In Santander, I separated from the group, which now included Wesley and Felipe, to seek out accommodation. I managed to get a place in an albergue owned by Isabel, an Asturian woman. We chatted for a while. I told her about my experience at Padre Ernesto's. She didn't seem to be a fan of the donativo model. It's more honest, she said, to state the charge up front, rather than trying to guilt people into paying as much as possible. I agree! She also informed me that some of the construction had been carried out by prisoners as part of their community service. Funny how they didn't mention that...

I'm sharing a room with a blunt but nice Belgian man called Stein. He's from the Flemish-speaking part of Belgium. After settling in, I set off for the lighthouse in Santander. My hip, which I injured a few years ago, has been niggling me on-and-off since I started the Camino. On the way to the lighthouse, it got bad enough that I started to limp. I was worried that this injury would sabotage my entire trip, and didn't want to provoke it further, so I headed back to the city centre and went to a restaurant called Casimira. By coincidence, Johann and Joepke, the Dutch couple, walked past as I was sitting down to eat. They joined me for dinner and we had a nice conversation, which raised my spirits after all the worrying about my hip. I ate a tasty Spanish omelette and a salad. We took a selfie before they left; they're returning to the Netherlands tomorrow. On my way back to the hotel, I ran into Ana, an Italian pilgrim who was in my dorm at Padre Ernesto's. We chatted about our lives for a while. She just finished studying medicine at college. Having gotten a taste of the unglamorous work that is done at hospitals, and facing several more years of training at a hospital in a provincial town, she's now questioning whether that's what she wants to do anymore.

